# A Note

This is a journal in which I will document my learning process. I will refer back to this in order to respond to potential future queries about my initial quantum programming experience. All entries are dated and timestamped in 24-hour time.

### Wed, Jul 31, 1:19

On the 28th, I set out to find a quantum language suitable to my needs. The day before this I had begun to read about quantum principles, but I was still not comfortable with principles such as entanglement. At first I experimented with Quipper, but I ultimately settled on QCL.

On the 29th I attempted to make a program to entangle 3 qubits to generate an equal probability from <1| to <6|, leaving <0| and <7| with a zero probability. This essentially emulates a die roll. I had no problem setting up the first qubit (obviously, 1/2 chance it's a <1| so a simple Hadamard suffices). The second qubit was not too difficult for me either once I discovered the Rot() function. At first I struggled with the third qubit a great deal. After failing to figure out a clever way to entangle it to the first two, I simply hard-coded an 8x8 matrix. After a little more thought, I figured out how to decompose this into two calls of a hardcoded 4x4 matrix gate. As I was unable to simplify this further, I posted a question on stackoverflow: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/17937220/how-can-i-make-a-two-qubit-controlled-rotate-in-qcl.

Today (really yesterday) I woke up ready to accept the controlled phase shift gate as something I needed to use. I looked back at one of the quantum programming tutorials to see how they suggested rotating a single qubit, and simply translated this over to a controlled-V gate. I went on to prove that the routine I had implemented actually did what it was supposed to. I then simplified this even further: my code is now a simple Hadamard followed by two controlled-V gates followed by another Hadamard. I understand why this code works, but I am still unclear exactly what makes up the phase of a qubit. The entire complex component of a qubit continues to confuse me. However, I do understand that a phase adjustment ultimately does not affect the probabilistic outcome of a given quantum state. One other thing I still do not understand: in the tutorial, they suggest shifting the result of a rotation by (pi/2 + a) in order to yield cos(t)*<0| + e^(i*a)*sin(t)*<1|. I do not understand why the pi/2 needs to be there. I will continue to play with single-qubit rotation until I fully understand.

In the mean time, I spent the latter half of today manipulating not gates in order to create a quantum adder on an arbitrarily sized qureg. I used this to add the outcomes of two die rolls in order to generate a probability distribution for two dice (e.g. the way you roll in Monopoly).

### Wed, Jul 31, 19:58

This morning I decided to create something to mix two states (i.e. Mix(<010|, <110|) = 0.5 <010| + 0.5 <110|). At first I was hopelessly unable to figure out how to do this. After a while, however, I realized that I could implement it if I made an equality gate. This gate would act as a NOT gate only if two n-qubit strings were identical. I then continued to make new discoveries: CNot(a, b) will only leave `a` with a value of <1| if a != b. Thus, I could make my equality gate if I could make a controlled not gate whose control was an n-qubit long string. Ultimately, I used a nice recursive algorithm to implement an n-qubit controlled not gate. From there I went up the ladder all the way back to my mixer. I completed this last step in about half an hour and was quite pleased with myself.

### Thu, Aug 1, 17:21

Last night and today I began to ponder how quantum algorithms could be faster than classical algorithms. I discovered that, in order to understand Shor's algorithm, I would first need a full grasp on the Quantum Fourier Transform. The tutorial which I've been following (http://www.quantiki.org/wiki/Basic_concepts_in_quantum_computation#Bibliography) had only a brief explanation and thus I was unable to grasp even the functionality of the QFT. Eventually, I came to understand the QFT as the DFT where the coefficients of each state (e.g. the coefficients of <000|, <001|, <010|… for a 3 qubit register) act as the vector which is to be transformed. Furthermore, in order to understand the actual QFT circuit, I decided to only prove that the circuit worked for a pure input (i.e. one of the input coefficients is 1 and the rest are 0).

On paper I was able to calculate what the coefficient for each result state would need to be. However, I had trouble using this information to derive the coefficient for each qubit. After reading http://www.cs.washington.edu/education/courses/cse599d/06wi/lecturenotes9.pdf I still struggled to understand some of the logic required to arrive at the final circuit. At present, I can convince myself that the circuit works, but it certainly does not feel natural or elegant to me in the least. I want to refrain from learning about Shor's algorithm, at least until I fully understand the QFT.

### Fri, Aug 2, 19:26

Today I finally became comfortable with the QFT. Now it is beginning to make sense to me how it works in its entirety. I think the majority of my struggling was caused by the unusual fact that the QFT can actually be expressed as a set of unentangled qubits. Anyways, I set out today to understand Shor's algorithm. I think that I now have a pretty good understanding of how the algorithm works.

In preparation for implementing Shor's algorithm on my own, I decided to write my own arithmetic operations so that I could implement exponentiation mod N (needed for Shor's algorithm). While I did not nearly finish what I plan to, I was able to implement an addition function which does not return an additional carry bit (although at present it still uses a scratch qubit for this). In addition, I made a wrapper function which adds in place (although at present it does allocate a third qureg). This will make it possible to implement long multiplication.

While most of the circuits I am implementing are pretty closely knit with their classical equivalents, I am noticing myself becoming increasingly comfortable with unitary operations. I can quickly tell whether something is possible or not, and I can pretty quickly implement any gate which is thrown my way.

### Sat, Aug 3, 1:48

Here is a brief update concerning my end-of-the-day progress. I have managed to remove the need for carry bits throughout the body of my addition algorithms. With this task complete, I will begin tomorrow to implement more complex math functions such as multiplication. Meanwhile, I have seen some talk about an efficient QFT-based adder. While it seems promising, I am concerned that it will fail to be fully accurate for large numbers due to imperfect V-gate precision. Thus, I am sticking to my classical adders for now.

### Sun, Aug 4, 21:22

Yesterday I did not make any significant progress, but I did make some serious refinements to my existing library. In fact, I made so many refinements that I created a new `mylib2/` directory in which I will be working for now on. What motivated me to make these changes was a realization that QCL includes a `cond` directive before a `qufunct`. This makes it possible to use if statements to check qubits, because all `cond` functions can only call other `cond` functions and ultimately this leads to a series of Not() calls which only operate if the internal condition array is a string of 1s. With this in mind, I remade all of my arithmetic functions with a neater naming convention and a suite of int-with-qureg arithmetic functions.

Yesterday I was beginning to become more comfortable with QCL's built-in inverter (although today I failed to realize its potential use for my modular multiplier). I used the fact that the two's complement is its own inverse in order to implement in-place two's complement based on a non-overwriting two's complement function.

Today I figured out how I shall implement a^x mod N evaluation for Shor's algorithm. Essentially, I will compute a^2 and only multiply by this if x[1] is set. Then I will compute a^4 and only multiply by this if x[2] is set. I can compute a^n mod N quickly in the classical setting, and then use `cond` magic to use `x` as a set of flags.

So, I set out on a course to realize modular exponentiation. My first step was to implement in place modular addition. I began this yesterday, but it turns out that much of the code I wrote yesterday was not even necessary in the end.

My next step was to implement multiplication. It was not difficult for me to implement multiplication which overwrote an initially zero'd register. However, in order to make an in-place multiplication operator invertible, I had to figure out how to zero out one of the input registers after computing the outcome. To do this, I briefly skimmed the wikipedia page for the Extended Euclidean Algorithm and wrote a subroutine to calculate the multiplicative inverse of `a` mod `N`. Then, using this, I could add `b` to a register without reading `b` directly. My last step was to make `b` its additive inverse mod `N` before computing `a^-1`*`N` into `b`. This allowed me to zero `b` and thus to swap it with my temp variable.

### Tue, Aug 6, 2:11

Late last night I added a `set check 1` to my unit test for modular multiplication and found somewhat bogus claims of heap corruption. When I investigated, I found one source of legitimate concern , specifically that my modular inverse computation was faulty because of how C computes the modulus for negative numbers. However, I also found a bug in QCL that causes it to report heap corruption for `not` directives in if statements when applied to quantum registers. I imagine that doing this should be equivalent to calling `Not()` on the register in question before and after the if statement and then using a normal conditional. Somehow, this is not the case. I emailed the author of QCL about the issue.

Today I really had no goal set besides finishing modular exponentiation, which was a cinch. I decided to implement the beginnings of Shor's algorithm. The only problem I ran into was my Quantum Fourier Transform implementation. However, I eventually realized that I needed to flip the bit order of the result in order for the quantum circuit to actually be possible. While I was able to implement Shor's algorithm to the point that I did, I am still struggling very much to understand quantum interference. Just the entire idea of phase shifting still bothers me. I will only be willing to write an Objective-C quantum computer library once I fully grasp how complex coefficients behave in entangled states and how a physical manifestation of this could possibly exist.
